What is a Graph?

1. Graph is an example of Non Linear Data Structure
2. A Graph is a collection of nodes connected through edges

    ____
  2      3
 /       |
1________4 Nodes/Vertices
   Edges

Formal definition of a Graph

1. A graph G = (V,E) is a collection of vertices and edges connecting these vertices
2. Used to model paths in a city, social networks, website backlinks, internal employee
 network, etc
3. A vertex or node is one fundamental unit/entity of which graphs are formed
4. An edge is uniquely defined by its 2 endpoints
5. Directed Graph - One way connection 
6. Undirected Edge - Two way connection 
7. Directed Graph - All directed edges
8. Undirected Graph - All undirected edges

Indegree & Outdegree of a node

1. Indegree = No. of edges going out of the nodes
2. Outdegree = No. of edges coming into the nodes

Example of graph usage

1. Facebook uses it for graph of users
2. Also used in web crawling for a website or for the entire world wide web
3. City routing

Ways to represent graph

1. Adjacency list - Mark the nodes with the list of its neighbors
2. Adjacency matrix - A(ij) = 1 for an edge between i and j, 0 otherwise!
3. Edge set - Store the pair of nodes/vertices connected with an edge. Example - {(0,1),(0,4),(1,4)}
4. Other implementations to represent a graph also exists. For example Compact list representation, cost adjacency list, cost adjacency matrix etc

Compact list representation - The entire graph is stored in a 1d array

Example for Adjacency list:
 let undirected graph
    0
   / \
  2___1
 
  1->0->2  (here 0->2 is linked list)
  0->1->2  (here 1->2 is linked list)    
  2->0->1  (here 0->1 is linked list)    

For Adjacency matrix

     0  1  2
   0 0  1  1
   1 1  0  1
   2 1  1  0 

1a. Cost adjacency list - Cost is stored along the links (we will store cost of node in linked list along with address of next node)
2a. Cost adjacency matrix - In this, 1 is replaced by cost of edge if they are connected, 0 otherwise! and if the cost can be 0 then -1 otherise

For Edge set 
   {(0,1,2)}
Most prefered and important representations are - Adjacency list and Adjacency matrix

Graph Trversal

1. Graph traversal refers to the process of visiting (checking and/or updating) each vertex(node) in a graph
2. Sequence of steps known as Graph traversal algorithm can be used to traverse a graph
3. Two Algorithms of Graph Traversal are:
    Breadth First Search (BFS) - Queue Data Structure
    Depth First Search (DFS) - Stack Data Structure

Exploring the vertex (Node)

1. We have already looked into tree traversal algorithms in our section on trees
2. In a typical Graph Traversal algorithm, we traverse through (or visit) all the nodes of a graph and add it to the collection of visited nodes
3. Exploring a vertex in a graph means visiting all the connected vertices

Breath First Search (BFS)

In BFS, we start with a node and start exploring its connected nodes. The same process is repeated with all the connecting nodes untill all the nodes are visited

BFS spanning tree: A spanning tree is a subgraph of a connected graph that includes all the vertices and forms a tree (i.e., it has no cycles). When BFS is used to traverse a graph, it can naturally generate a spanning tree by recording the parent-child relationships as nodes are visited.
Level Order traversal: Level Order Traversal, also known as Breadth-First Search (BFS), is a method to traverse a binary tree level by level. This means that all nodes at the same level are visited before moving on to the next level.

Depth First Search (DFS)

In DFS, we start with a node and start exploring its connected nodes keeping on suspending the exploration of previous nodes

it uses stack (or recursion also but recursion also makes stack so by default here also we are using stack)

Subgraphs

A subgraph of graph G is a graph whose vertices and edges are subsets of the original graph G

Connected and Complete graphs

1. A connected graph is graph that is connected in the sense of a topological space, i.e., there is a path from any point to any other point in the graph. 
1a. A graph that is not connnected is said to be disconnected

2. A complete graph is a simple undirected graph in which every pair of distinct vertices is connected by a unique edge

What is Spanning Tree?

1. A subgraph of a graph G is a graph whose vertices and edges are subsets of the original graph G
2. A connected subgraph "S" of graph G(V,E) is said to be a Spanning tree of graph G iff (if and only if):
   1. All vertices of G must be present in S
   2. No. of edges in S should be |V|-1 (where V is number of nodes/vertices)
   3. No cycles should be there (acyclic)
3. Total spanning trees are = n^(n-2) where n = number of nodes/vertices
 
   What is Minimum spanning Tree (MST)?
   
   1. The cost of the spanning tree is the sum of the weights of all the edges in the tree
   2. A minimum spanning tree (MST) is the spanning tree with minimum cost
   3. Other conditions are same as above conditions of spanning tree

Prims Algorithm

1. Prims algorithm use Greedy approach to find the minimum spanning tree
2. We start withbany node and start creating a MST
3. In Prims Algorithm we grow the spanning tree from a starting position until n-1 edges are formed (or n nodes are covered)

Krushkal Algorithm

1. Kruskal's Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) algorithm is to connect all the vertices of a graph with the minimum total edge weight while avoiding cycles. This algorithm 
employs a greedy approach, meaning it makes locally optimal choices at each step to achieve a globally optimal solution.
2. Algorithm:
   1. First, it sorts all the edges of the graph by their weights,
   2. Then starts the iterations of finding the spanning tree.
   3. At each iteration, the algorithm adds the next lowest-weight edge one by one, such that the edges picked until now does not form a cycle.


